Hi, my name is Brian Caffo,
and this is the lecture on
what statistics is good for.
Now at the start of every class,
we try to define concepts,
so I went to the authority and
asked Google what statistics was good for,
and it came up with this.
Statistics, the practice or science of
collecting and analyzing numerical data in
large quantities, especially for
the purpose of inferring proportions
in a whole from those in a representative
sample, that's quite a mouthful.
So I've decided instead, of trying to
define statistics, to really just pick up
some of the core activities of statistics
and go through some examples of those.
When I think about the core of statistics
I come up with four key
activities that define the field.
There are of course others, and
all of these activities are overlapping.
They're not perfectly parcellating okay,
but these four activities
are descriptive analysis, which includes
things like exploratory data analysis,
just quantification, like creating tables,
summarization and unsupervised clustering.
Inference, the second topic
includes things like estimation,
sampling, variability,
and defining populations.
Prediction, the third activity that I
think I've associated with statistics
includes things like machine learning,
supervised learning any instance where
we wanna create a lot of predictions
from maybe a lot of predictors,
or even just a few predictors.
And then design, design is
the process of designing experiments.
So again, these four activities
to me cover a lot of what I
think of as statistics,
and they're overlapping.
Inference and prediction are,
of course, highly overlapping.
Descriptive analysis and inference,
they're all quite a bit overlapping, but
let me go through some examples of each
of these to get you sort of thinking
about some of these topics and
how statistics might be useful for you.
So here let's start with
descriptive analysis, and
I put up a picture of the great Roger
Peng's Exploratory Data Analysis book,
which you can get for free on Leanpub.
By the way, I think that's Roger's
actual dog on the cover, by the way.
So let's talk a little bit
about descriptive analysis, and
in each case when I described
one of these four activities I
tried to come up with an example that's
a good defining example of these.
In this case, I came up with
the example that's from my field,
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
that really created quite a stir.
In this case, some really good
researchers, Power, Barnes,
Snyder, Schlager and Peterson,
real heavy hitters in this area,
did this great plot and they, let me
summarize what's going on in this plot.
They were looking,
were interested a lot in this area,
is correlations between different areas in
the brain with respect to brain activity.
So we want to know when
brain activity goes up and
down, when that correlates in
different areas of the brain.
We call that connectivity.
And what they figured
out by doing this plot,
is when they got rid of some bad scans
from people moving their head around,
that the estimated correlations from their
data changed quite a bit, and the short
range correlations changed in a different
way from the long range correlations.
And this had profound impact on our field,
because everyone had thought
up to that point that they had been doing
a good job of getting rid of head motion,
but this exploratory plot really
was a defining characteristic for
making the field understand that well no,
there was some motion leftover.
And it's possible that a lot of what's
being reported in the literature is not
actual brain cognitivity
of scientific interest,
but whether or not people are moving
their head in the scanner.
And I don't know these folks personally,
but I can imagine them going through
an exploratory data analysis, seeing
this plot, and having an aha moment.
And that's I think,
what exploratory data analysis is best for
is really coming up with hypotheses.
Since this paper was published,
mountains of research
has been done on the subject
of motion in the fMRI scanner.
So that's a great example in my mind
of an exploratory data analysis plot,
this plot made it into their paper and
created quite a stir.
Okay, let's now talk about inference.
I have a picture of my much more austere
statistical inference Leanpub book,
which you can get for free on Leanpub if
you wanna read more about the subject of
statistical inference.
I define statistical inference as
the process of making conclusions about
populations from samples.
And to me, it was pretty easy
to think of a famous example
of statistical inference because we're
confronted with one very frequently and
that is election polling.
In that case, the population we're
interested in making inferences about is
the population of voters on election day,
and
we want to know the proportion of
them that will vote for a candidate.
So we are confronted with a fairly
classical statistical inference problem
every two years, four years for
presidential elections, and in fact,
in the 2012 presidential election,
there was quite a brew ha ha exactly over
the process of statistical inference.
In fact, one of the news
television shows on the night
of the election,
one of the political pundits,
Carl Rogue, just refused to believe the,
in fact, their own team's polling results.
And even prior, well prior to that night,
the statistician,
Nate Silver,
had been doing a lot of publicity,
really kind of promoting the idea that
well, Obama's really for the most part
locked up this election to much derision
from a lot of the political pundits.
And what happened after the election
was a very interesting discussion
about the role of inference, and
about the role of how much we believe
inference when discussing polling.
So if you want an interesting collection
of reading on statistical inference and
how it plays out in the media,
then you can read up on the 2012 election.
But at any rate,
more germane to this class is the idea
that election polling is a great
example of statistical inference.
We have a clearly defined
population of interest,
a clear parameter that we're interested
in, and we can't poll everyone, so
we're gonna get an estimate of that
population parameter from a sample.
Let's talk about prediction, and
I put a link here to Jeff Leagues
practical machine learning class
which is a great class to learn
about the details of prediction.
So I didn't have, again this is another
example where I didn't have to think too
hard about coming up with a really
well known example of prediction,
and here I thought about
stock market prediction.
And I think,
to me one of the characteristics of
prediction over inference, because
those two subjects bleed together quite
a bit, one of the hallmarks of prediction,
is a move away from trying to understand
mechanisms and models, in a move toward
trying to actually create predictions and
really evaluate them with how accurate
the predictions are not how much of
the unknown state of the world
a model would explain.
So, to me stock market predictions
are a great example of this, because for
many people who are predicting
the stock market,
what they really care about
is simply the losses or
gains, the monetary losses or gains
that occur from the predictions, okay?
And, this is the modern way to think
about predictions I might add.
And so, the frame of mind has
shifted whereas someone who was
an academic studying the markets
might be interested in why,
the why the market moves in the ways
that it does, regardless of whether or
not they personally make a lot
of money off of that knowledge.
Another great example of prediction
that's occurring a lot lately and
probably one of the things that drove you
to this class, is how important modern
machine learning and modern prediction
algorithms have become in data science.
For example, Amazon wants to recommend for
you things that you might
wanna buy on their site.
Netflix wants to recommend movies.
At the heart of all these activities
is a machine learning process
that's coming up with
these recommendations.
And again, they care less about
the underlying psychology and
fundamental truths of why
you're doing these things, but
more care about, we wanna give
the person the most relevant ads, so
they click and then they buy things.
So, a huge chunk of marketing and
online retail and etc.,
all rely on machine learning now.
It's been somewhat of
a revolution in prediction.
Finally, the last thing that we
wanted to talk about was design, and
design is perhaps one of the most
important things that we cover.
Though it's often overlooked, and
it's often overlooked because in many,
many settings we don't have
control over the design.
We just get the data that we get,
and we don't have a choice over it.
However, and I put up a picture
of the famous R.A. Fisher's book.
This is a reprint of it from Oxford, the
Statistical Methods Experimental Design
and Scientific Interference is
a real classic, so, and R.A.
Fisher was the patriarch of
the idea of statistical design.
So when trying to think of an example for
statistical design,
the first thing that came to my mind for
data science was AB testing, sort of
the most classy examples of statistics
design in the data science world.
But I wanna instead talk
more about clinical trials,
because I think clinical
trials impact our lives more.
When things are really on the line, when
the government has to decide whether or
not to allow a drug, or a therapy to
be executed to the population at large.
There's a demand to have a clinical trial,
and it's so important that there
are entities like clinicaltrials.gov to
keep track and monitor clinical trials.
The hallmark of a clinical trial is
the randomization of treatment groups, so
that it balances unobserved co-variants.
So the idea of randomization is
the fundamental hallmark of both clinical
trials and AB testing, but germane to
our discussion today is the fact that,
that randomization is part of a carefully
controlled experimental design.
In a clinical trial,
they're trying to control as much of
the experimental design as possible, and
that's one of these four corners of the
field of statistics that is so important.
So just to remind you what
these four activities are,
they were exploratory data analysis,
inference,
prediction, experimental design.
So, I look forward to seeing you
in some of our future classes, and
we'll talk a little bit more about
each of these topics in turn.